[5] Drummond: “Early German Music in Philadelphia.”

The many quaint advertisements of those times give an idea of the
musical activities of the people. Amateurs often assisted professionals.

Joseph Cézar, pupil of Viotti, in 1792, announced that: “Many amateurs
of the first eminence being so kind as to honor him with their
patronage, will perform,” etc. Again we hear of “a young lady who
has never before appeared in public and therefore craves protection
from all manner of insult.” Often the professional was “assisted by a
gentleman.” Infant prodigies, who were always under ten, were numerous
and they had invariably appeared before the crowned heads of Europe.

Organ dealers, spinet, harpsichord and piano makers, as well as
dealers in musical merchandise began to appear. Michael Hillegas,
first Treasurer of the United States and first music dealer in
Philadelphia, dealt in organs as early as 1753. His stock of music
embraced all the popular and standard compositions of the day, and
included those of Tartini, Tessorini, Pepush, Corelli, Händel, Vivaldi,
Burney, Stamitz, Barbella, and Scarlatti. Besides sheet music,
many other articles were to be had at his shop as we see from this
advertisement:

    “To be sold by Michael Hillegas, at his House in Second
    street, opposite Samuel Morris, Esq., an extraordinary
    good and neat Harpsichord with four stops; a good
    Violin-cello, an Assortment of English and Italian
    Violins, as well as common ones, as double lined, of
    which some extraordinary; a parcel of good German
    Flutes, imported here from Italy. Also imported in the
    last ships from London, a large Assortment of Musick,
    of the best Masters, viz: Solos, Overtures, Concertos,
    Sonatas, and Duets, for Violins, German Flutes,
    Hautboys, French Horns, Violoncellos, and Guitars,
    Voluntaries, Lessons for Organs and Harpsichords, ruled
    paper of various Sorts for Musick, and Musick Books,
    Tutors or Books of Instructions to learn to play on the
    Violin, German Flute, Hautboy, or Common Flute, without
    a Master, Song Books, Cantatas, Songs on Sheets, and
    a Choice Parcel of Violin Strings, etc.”
    (Penna. Gazette, 1759.)

John Behrent has the honor of being the first piano forte maker in this
city. In 1775 his advertisement in the Pennsylvania Packet informed the
public that:

    “John Behrent, Joiner and Instrument-Maker living in
    Third street continued in Campington, directly opposite
    Coate’s Burying-ground, Has just finished for Sale, an
    extraordinary fine instrument, by the name of Piano
    Forte, of Mahogany, in the manner of an harpsichord,
    with hammers, and several changes: He intends to
    dispose of it on very reasonable terms: and being a
    master of such sort of work, and a new beginner in this
    country, he requests all lovers of music to favour him
    with their custom, and they shall not only be honestly
    served, but their favours gratefully acknowledged, by
    their humble servant, John Behrent.”[6]

[6] Drummond: “Early German Music in Philadelphia.”

Familiar professional names in the early days were James Bremner,
teacher of Hopkinson, John Gualdo, Stephen Forrage, George
d’Eissenburg, Philip Roth, Philip Phile, John Bentley, Henri Capron,
A. Juhan, Andrew Adgate, and Victor Pelissier, nearly all of whom
were teachers as well as performers and were strong influences in the
musical life of Philadelphia and in the training of the young who were
early taught to crave the best musically.

The American Revolution caused concerts and other entertainments to be
almost entirely abandoned, with the exception of the Mischianza and
other affairs in which the British were the leading spirits. Little
occurred during this period to advance musical art.

With the country again at peace and with the dawn of a new century,
interest in music revived and early in 1820 eighty-five men organized
the Musical Fund Society, so far Philadelphia’s greatest musical
achievement. The officers and directors chosen on January 29th, 1820,
were:

    Dr. William P. De Wees, _President_
    Dr. Robert Patterson, _Vice-president_
    Daniel Lammot, _Treasurer_
    John K. Kane, _Secretary_

Managers of the Fund: James W. Barker, Thomas Artley, Francis G. Smith,
Edward Hudson, Benjamin Carr, William Strickland, Henry P. Barrekens,
William Hawkins, Charles A. Poulson, Benjamin Say, George Schetky and
Andrew Farrouihl.

The Charter states “That the essential objects of the said corporation
shall be the relief of decayed musicians and their families and the
cultivation of skill and diffusion of taste in music.” Four years
later Musical Fund Hall was built at Eighth and Locust streets.
For over thirty years this building was the centre of all music in
Philadelphia, except opera. The Society maintained an orchestra and a
chorus, and conducted an Academy of Music, which was the first school
in Philadelphia permitted by Charter to confer Academic degrees in
music. The orchestra of the Musical Fund Society was composed of its
members, professional and amateur, and there were strict regulations
as to rehearsals. They were players of no mean attainments for their
time, and it is to be regretted that the influx of dazzling foreign
performers was permitted to quench the ardor of the audiences and
finally their own. The quality of the music performed was of a high
order and compared favorably with that of Europe and of other American
cities of that period. The “Creation” was chosen for the first concert,
but the music could not be procured in Baltimore, New York or Boston,
or even in Europe, so the plan was abandoned. When it was first
produced trombone players were engaged to come from Bethlehem, as there
were none in this town. Indeed, the instrument itself was unknown and
aroused much curiosity. Later at these concerts (1845), Beethoven’s
Symphony No. 1 was given in full. It was announced as “The Entire Grand
Symphony of Beethoven,” and between the movements were vocal numbers
serious and comic. During the next season the Second Symphony was given
in the same way, and two years later came the “Eroica,” the Overture to
Oberon, and the Midsummer Night’s Dream.

When the period of the great visiting virtuosi, Jenny Lind, Henriette
Sontag, Vieuxtemps, Wilhelmj, Ole Bull, Sivori, Malibran, Lagrange,
Alboni, Hensler, Gottschalk and others arrived, the excitement over
their first appearances caused a decrease in interest in home talent
and achievements, and the activities of the Musical Fund Society were
maintained with less and less enthusiasm, until finally the Academy and
then the orchestra were abandoned. Another reason for this decline was
the growing popularity of opera, to the detriment of personal musical
effort by Philadelphians.

During the early years of the nineteenth century, as in the preceding
one, Philadelphia was the abiding place of a number of excellent
and hard working musicians. These carried on the labors of their
predecessors by teaching the young, leading choirs and guiding the
musical opinion of the city. Little recognition has been given these
men, who included among their number, Alexander Reinagle, George
Shetky, Benjamin Carr, Benjamin Cross, Raynor Taylor, Thomas Loud,
Charles P. Hupfeldt, and later Charles Jarvis and his son, Charles J.
Jarvis.

In our own time among the many musicians who have fostered music
here by their own example and by training others, four should be
particularly mentioned:

Dr. Hugh A. Clarke, for fifty years Professor of Music at the
University of Pennsylvania, whose sway has been felt through the many
students who have studied under him; Wm. W. Gilchrist, his pupil;
Michael H. Cross, and Richard Zeckwer. These men wielded so potent an
influence over music students and music lovers, that Philadelphians
owe them a heavy debt. They received the musical laying on of hands
and transmitted the traditions that have existed here for two hundred
years.
