CHAPTER IX.


As time went on, and the situation slowly developed itself, Minna
was forced into an unwilling, annoyed kind of admiration for Signora
Dietrich--the admiration which one must necessarily experience for a
woman who has a distinct, rounded purpose in her mind, and who devotes
herself with a single aim to the accomplishment of that purpose. Fulvia
had availed herself of Minna’s invitation to come and see her, and
presented herself almost every day: ostensibly to attend to her birds;
in reality, as they both knew, to escape from the fear and constraint
and oppression outside, into a more congenial atmosphere. It was here
that Minna began to feel that admiration for the signora already spoken
of.

She could not doubt that Fulvia’s mother knew perfectly well how
wretched her daughter was, nor that, when with Minna, she sought relief
from that wretchedness in, at any rate, occasional conversations on
the subject of her unhappiness. It would have been very easy for
Signora Dietrich to prevent the intercourse, forbid her daughter to
enter Minna’s rooms, put a stop to the whole thing, at any moment she
might choose to do so. But she did nothing of the kind, nor ever made
the least objection to the visits. She was evidently very sure of her
power, and did not trouble herself to interfere in small matters. It
angered Minna, even while she admired it. She was, as has so often
been said, not accustomed to be thwarted, and this calm smiling
contempt for her influence irritated her extremely.

In a futile kind of way Minna had tried to find out something about
Marchmont, wishing she could hear of something so greatly to his
discredit that it might impress even Signora Dietrich with his
undesirability as a husband for her daughter. In vain; she did vaguely
hear something about him, but nothing that could be called exactly to
his discredit--only that he had appeared in London some two years ago,
and had there made a not very successful effort to ‘get into’ society;
that he had been hated intensely for his meanness and vulgarity; that
he had proposed for an English girl of good family, great beauty,
and little or no fortune, and had been sent about his business with
disdain; all of which might be disagreeable for the gentleman himself,
especially if he could not conquer himself of his habit of stinginess,
but which formed no data on which to go to Signora Dietrich and say,
‘You cannot possibly let your daughter marry this man.’

If Minna was conscious that the signora must be aware of the interviews
between herself and Fulvia, and must be unable to approve of them,
there were other thoughts which it never entered into her head to think
of, but as to which she was destined to be, later, much enlightened.
In the meantime the winter progressed; and she was still at Casa
Dietrich, still profoundly interested in the drama going on there,
still cherishing a spark of hope, founded on the fact that, as the
marriage had not yet taken place, perhaps it might be, ‘somehow or
other,’ altogether averted. She forced herself to be smiling and polite
to the _padrona_ of the house, hoping that by studious civility her
word, if ever she should find a chance to put it in, might carry some
weight with it--in which feeble assumption she merely illustrated the
fact that the wish is father to the thought, and that she utterly
miscalculated her enemy’s nature and capacities.

Fulvia began to look thin and pale, but, unfortunately, even more
beautiful and attractive in her delicacy than when she had been in
blooming health. Her great eyes grew more lustrous, her beautiful face
gained a charm of haunting, wistful loveliness, from the very fact
that its rounded contours were changed; and the mournful droop of
her mouth was undoubtedly exquisitely beautiful. Sometimes she cast
aside her despondency, with an effort, perhaps, but completely, and
was her gay old self again, or very nearly so; laughed at them all,
caressed her mother, alternately teased and coaxed Signor Giuseppe
till his sorry expression relaxed and his eyes softened, and when he
ventured to turn them full upon the girl and study her, as he had
been wont to do, his sadness vanished; love and joy shone from his
eyes, ‘carina carisssima’ flowed from his lips, and there was a gleam
of happiness once more.